documentation/cookbook/user-contributed-behaviors.markdown, before:

---
layout: documentation
title: User-Contributed Behaviors
---

# User-Contributed Behaviors #

Here is a list of Propel behaviors contributed by users. Feel free to use them or to add your own behaviors to this list.


## Agnostic Behaviors ##

* [EqualNestBehavior](http://github.com/CraftyShadow/EqualNestBehavior) Supports relations where a class references to itself and the columns within the reference class are equal. Suitable for "Friends"-like relationships.

* [ArrayAccessBehavior](http://github.com/nnarhinen/propel-arrayaccess) Adds ArrayAccess implementations to the BaseObjects

* [DefaultOrderBehavior](https://github.com/gharlan/propel-default-order-behavior) Adds support for user defined order for tables.

* [PropelL10nBehavior](https://github.com/gossi/propel-l10n-behavior) Lets you
  globally define your locales and dependencies. Seamless localization for Propel.

* [UuidBehavior](https://github.com/donkeycode/propel-uuid-behavior) Lets you add a column with UUID automatically set.

* [OverridableBehavior](https://github.com/donkeycode/propel-overridable-behavior) Override of data made easy.

Commit message:

Adding synced_table behavior
- Article for `synced_table` behavior
- Links in menus as well as `archivable` and `versionable` behaviors
- Links to articles and PRs in "What's new" page
- Short update about using multiple user contributed behaviors

documentation/cookbook/user-contributed-behaviors.markdown, after:

---
layout: documentation
title: User-Contributed Behaviors
---

# User-Contributed Behaviors #

Here is a list of Propel behaviors contributed by users. Feel free to use them or to add your own behaviors to this list.

>**Tip**In ❊ Perpl ❊, you can combine several behaviors from the same Github repository since [PR #25](https://github.com/perplorm/perpl/pull/25).


## Agnostic Behaviors ##

* [EqualNestBehavior](http://github.com/CraftyShadow/EqualNestBehavior) Supports relations where a class references to itself and the columns within the reference class are equal. Suitable for "Friends"-like relationships.

* [ArrayAccessBehavior](http://github.com/nnarhinen/propel-arrayaccess) Adds ArrayAccess implementations to the BaseObjects

* [DefaultOrderBehavior](https://github.com/gharlan/propel-default-order-behavior) Adds support for user defined order for tables.

* [PropelL10nBehavior](https://github.com/gossi/propel-l10n-behavior) Lets you
  globally define your locales and dependencies. Seamless localization for Propel.

* [UuidBehavior](https://github.com/donkeycode/propel-uuid-behavior) Lets you add a column with UUID automatically set.

* [OverridableBehavior](https://github.com/donkeycode/propel-overridable-behavior) Override of data made easy.
